# Original Text: Subsection "Completeness" on Page 12

In connection to the model theory, direct algebraic descriptions of
our calculi are to be obtained in terms of the duploids arising from
the effect adjunctions. These direct models are to be put in
reflection with the enriched adjunction models, to generalise
Führmann’s direct characterisation of \lambda_C-models [21], in the
continuity of [39]. In fact, we conjecture that the calculi form
initial models, not only for direct duploid models, but also for the
adjunction models, provided that the data of values and stacks is
appropriately preserved.

# Rewritten Text

We have shown that our L-calculi can be soundly interpreted in
corresponding adjunction models, and we conjecture that the syntax is
*complete* for these models as well. However, proving completeness is
challenging, because there is a large gap between the syntax of the
calculi and our description of the models. In the terminology of
Führmann [21], our adjunction models are *indirect*: the primitive
operations in the syntax and semantics are not aligned, and the
semantics is more complex as a result. In previous work [39] the third
author has presented duploids as a direct notion of model for
L-calculi, with soundness and completeness proofs. We aim to prove
completeness of L-calculi with respect to adjunction models by
relating duploids and adjunctions. In particular, we conjecture that
duploids can be identified with adjunctions satisfying a "saturation"
condition, extending Führmann's results relating models of
call-by-value.

We conjecture that the completeness proof would justify our
requirement that our adjunctions are enriched over *distributive*
presheaves, rather than arbitrary presheaves. We only used this
restriction to prove equivalence of our adjunction models with CBPV
models, they were not required to prove soundness. However, our syntax
is necessarily distributive, so distributivity is most likely required
for the completeness proof.
