
 Abstract
================================================================================

Interdisciplinary collaboration is important for conducting research in such 
complex fields as personal health services, yet it is associated with unique 
challenges, and reports on such collaborations are limited. In this paper, we 
describe our experience with the two particular frameworks for 
interdisciplinary collaboration, using the problem of autonomy in residential 
care communities as a case study. These communities allow individuals with 
chronic health conditions to live independently, but transition to a community 
may be associated with loss of autonomy, which negatively impacts health of its 
residents.

 1 Introduction
================================================================================

Interdisciplinary collaboration is important for conducting research in such 
complex fields as personal health services. For example, consider residential 
care communities such as assisted living facilities. They allow people with 
chronic health conditions [1] to continue to live independently, as in the home 
environment such individuals would require assistance with managing their 
condition and daily life activities [2]. However, transition to a residential 
facility might be perceived as loss of autonomy. Given that reduced autonomy 
among older adults negatively impacts health and decreases quality of life [4], 
residential care services ought to preserve and promote consumer autonomy. To 
design the optimal service, collaboration between multiple disciplines is 
needed, including service design, personal health informatics, and the health 
sciences. However, it presents unique challenges, including divergent 
terminology, theoretical frameworks, and methods of inquiry [6].

There have been several studies devoted to methodology of interdisciplinary 
research collaboration, but reports describing such collaborations are limited 
[10]. In this paper we discuss our experience of applying the two frameworks 
for interdisciplinary collaboration to the problem of autonomy in residential 
care facilities. The first framework by Choi and Pak [7] is represented by the 
acronym TEAMWORK, which stands for team, enthusiasm, accessibility, motivation, 
workplace, objectives, role, and kinship. The second work we apply, by Witteman 
and Stahl [8], advocates the use of a five-step ‘deep dive’ [9] to enhance 
collaboration.

 2 TEAMWORK and "Deep Dive" Applied
================================================================================

Our interdisciplinary research project was devoted to autonomy in the 
residential care setting. The purpose was to generate a conceptual model of 
autonomy that would facilitate the development of an autonomy-promoting service 
prototype.

In this section we describe how we applied the two frameworks, TEAMWORK and 
"Deep Dive", to our project. In particular, we discuss our experience 
assembling a team of researchers from the fields of service design, nursing, 
marketing, and computer science, as well as the strategies we employed to 
integrate knowledge from the design, human factors, and nursing literature.

2.1 TEAMWORK: Assembling a Team
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Team.** Generally, a research team, including interdisciplinary one, consists 
of one or several leaders and a number of members. The TEAMWORK framework 
suggests selecting team leaders with communication skills and familiarity in 
the involved disciplines. At the same time, the team members need to be 
flexible, and agree that the study is best examined by the means of multiple 
disciplines. Following this recipe, we ended up with an interdisciplinary team 
described in Figure 0. In our view, each of the involved disciplines 
contributes a unique perspective to the understanding of autonomy.

| Label | Title                | Affilation                                         | Role                      |
|-------|----------------------|- --------------------------------------------------|---------------------------|
| PI    | Assistant Professor  | College of Arts, Media, and Design                 | Principal Investigator    |
| A1    | Dean                 | School of Nursing                                  | Advisor                   |
| A2    | Tenured Professor    | School of Business                                 | Advisor                   |
| CPI   | Assistant Professor  | School of Nursing                                  | Co-Principal Investigator |
| S1    | Phd Student          | School of Nursing                                  | Member                    |
| S2    | Phd Student          | Joint College of Computer and Information Science
                                 and the Bouvé College of Health Sciences           | Member                    |
| V1    | Visiting Scholar     | School of Design (Tongji University in China)      | Member                    |
| U1    | Senior Undergraduate | College of Arts, Media, and Design                 | Member                    |

Figure 0. Our Interdisciplinary Team


**Enthusiasm.** A research team will succeed in its endeavor if the team 
members are interested in the project topic and when the success of the project 
can advance their careers~[7]. Our interdisciplinary team is comprised 
primarily of early career investigators who benefit from the guidance of senior 
faculty while also gaining research experience. In addition, the topic under 
study is relevant to each team member’s individual research interests: autonomy 
is a phenomenon of interest to designers, nurses, and marketing professionals 
alike, each of whom aim to meet the needs of individuals.

Our enthusiasm about the project encountered one of the barriers described by 
Choi and Pak [7]. Specifically, guidelines for multiple authorship vary across 
disciplines. In nursing and the health sciences, a reader typically expects the 
first author to make the most significant contribution to a scholarly work, and 
the last author is increasingly regarded as the “senior” author who oversaw the 
project. In other disciplines, such as design and marketing, authors are simply 
listed in descending order of contribution.

Similarly, differences in tenure decisions exist across disciplines. In nursing 
and the health sciences, publication in a journal is valued more highly than 
presentation at a conference, yet the opposite is true in design and computer 
science most of the time.

These differences posed a challenge to our team as we sought to disseminate our 
research findings most effectively while also assisting our team members to 
meet their career objectives.

**Accessibility.** The third strategy of the TEAMWORK framework is to ensure 
accessibility of the team members. The importance of working together in a 
physical setting is known to promote interdisciplinary work [7]. However, 
various duties often make it difficult for team members to connect in person. 
We overcame this barrier by scheduling a weekly team meeting and using online 
platforms such as Skype and Google Hangouts to connect with distant team 
members. As suggested by Choi and Pak [7], Internet and email can also be 
useful. 

In addition to the physical and virtual proximity of team members, avoiding 
language problems is another important factor to enhance accessibility [7]. We 
used shared language and avoided disciplinary-specific jargon to the extent 
possible. Reading relevant literature from disciplines outside of our own 
improved our understanding of one another’s specific disciplinary perspective 
and their domain languages. 
 
**Motivation.** The next strategy outlined in the TEAMWORK framework is to 
ensure team members stay motivated to participate in the project. The potential 
for the project to answer a challenging research question may serve as its own 
motivation, but additional incentives, such as solid funding, may be necessary 
[7]. Our project received financial support in the form of a 15-month grant, 
which allowed the team leaders to sponsor student team members, fund data 
collection, and purchase the proper software to analyze the data.

**Workplace.** Choi and Pak [7] emphasized the importance of institutional 
support for interdisciplinary collaboration. Our team benefited from affilation 
with a university that values interdisciplinary collaboration, offering 
numerous interdisciplinary majors and minors, and providing space for 
interdisciplinary team meetings. The support of tenured faculty from several 
disciplines helped to recruit a diverse team and provided its members with the 
opportunity to collaborate outside their respective schools and colleges. 

**Objectives.** Development of a common goal and shared vision is another 
important element to promote interdisciplinary work. Discipline conflicts may 
arise when team members have conflicting ideas. For example, researchers from 
health sciences have a preference for qualitative methods based on theories, 
while designers have a preference for concept models based on brainstorming. In 
our case, we mixed the preferences by conducting a qualitative research first, 
followed by the concept models from brainstorming exercises for several 
sessions. We proposed a theory-based concept model based on our qualitative 
research results. 

**Role.** The TEAMWORK framework advocates negotiating clear roles and rotating 
responsibilities among team members to reduce role overload. Our approach 
involved identifying three key phases of our project: (1) secondary research; 
(2) primary research; and (3) service design. All team members engaged in 
secondary research, which allowed each team member to gain a broad 
understanding of elder autonomy. The primary research was done by team members 
from the School of Nursing and College of Health Sciences using qualitative 
research methods Finally, representatives of the School of Business and the 
College of Arts, Media, and Design were primarily responsible for the service 
design phase.

**Kinship.** Last but not least, it is important to facilitate open 
communication between team members and to provide constructive feedback on 
their performance. Lack of communication may hinder the working relationship; 
similarly, unequal power between disciplines may result in group rivalry. We 
engaged in weekly team meetings where we discussed and provided feedback on 
both the research strategy and written artifacts. Given that our leadership 
team itself was interdisciplinary, power between disciplines was perceived as 
equal. In addition we divided workload according to each team member’s area of 
expertise. This ensured each team member was recognized for his or her 
strengths.


2.2 Framing the Problem: Conducting a Deep Dive 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Deep-Dive technique [9] was originally developed by IDEO, the leading 
industrial design company. The technique has been widely applied in 
interdisciplinary research to enhance collaboration and participation. The deep 
dive entails (1) conducting secondary research to identify gaps in current 
knowledge and understand the scope of the problem; (2) visualizing theory-based 
conceptual models; (3) conducting user research to observe current practices 
and ascertain users’ perspectives; (4) prototyping, designing, developing, and 
user testing; and (5) implementing the newly designed service [8]. We adapted 
the ‘deep dive’ technique [8] in this work to improve the performance of our 
team across the fields. Since this project is in progress, we will focus only 
on the first three phases in this paper. 


2.2.1 Identify Research Problems 

We conducted secondary research from the design, nursing, and human-computer 
interaction literature to identify and frame the problem of autonomy among 
older adults with chronic illness who live in residential care facilities. From 
a nursing perspective, there are several factors that determine autonomy in 
this population: the degree to which individuals (1) retain control over their 
decisions [13], (2) have privacy in residential care [14], and (3) are able to 
maintain existing relationships with their friends, families, and neighbors 
[15]. From a design perspective, design can influence an individual’s autonomy. 
For example, Friedman’s work [16] discussed how hardware design can either 
hinder or improve a person’s technology control. In the field of human-computer 
interaction, four spheres of autonomy [17] are known: design of technology, 
daily activities, personalized software design, and psychological development. 
Overall there have been few investigations into how to enhance autonomy through 
design. Therefore, our interdisciplinary research team aimed to identify this 
gap and understand the scope of the problem.

2.2.2 Visualize Theory-Based Conceptual Models

To visualize a conceptual model of autonomy we had to perform two steps: first, 
select relevant theories to base upon, and second, incorporate knowledge from 
those theories into one picture. We picked the following theories: 
social-ecological models, design theories, and transformative service research 
(TSR). The first one is important in the field of nursing and health sciences; 
it focuses on the nature of people’s transactions with their physical and 
sociocultural environments [5]. The third one, TSR, is a relatively new 
research area that focuses on services and well-being; it integrates "consumer 
and service research" [19].

<Fig 1>

To perform the second step, i.e. generate visual conceptual models guiding 
the user research phase, our team conducted a series of brainstorming 
workshops. First, each team member extracted key terms from the literature 
independently and wrote down the terms on sticky notes (Fig. 1); this helped us 
to converge on common ideas and concepts and move thoughts around. Next, we 
used the affinity diagram process [18] to identify themes by grouping common 
notes. This led to the development of the final conceptual model of autonomy.

2.2.3 Conduct User Research

User research comprised qualitative and quantitative parts. Qualitative 
research included semi-structured interviews, field observations at 
participants’ homes, and journaling daily routines of participants. This part 
helped us to understand what determines autonomy among elder residents of care 
facilities. Quantitative assessments included the Rapid Estimate of Health 
Literacy in Medicine – Short Form [20] and the Allen Cognitive Level Screen 
(ACLS) [21]. The ACLS is used in nursing research and clinical practice to 
assess functional cognition -- an individual’s capacity to accomplish everyday 
activities in community living environments [22]. Ethical approval was granted 
by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at our university. All participants had 
signed consent forms prior to data collection. Eligible participants were (a) 
aged 65 years and older; (b) living with at least one chronic health condition; 
(c) residents of a residential care community; and (d) able to communicate in 
verbal and written English.

In the next phase of our study, we will analyze qualitative data through 
directed content analysis and will summarize quantitative data through 
descriptive statistics. The results of these analyses will guide the prototype 
design phase of our study. User testing and evaluation are left for future 
work.

2.3 Interdisciplinary Research Evaluation
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In the fields of nursing and the health sciences, effectiveness is an essential 
measure of intervention research [23]. We assess effectiveness by means of 
feasibility and acceptability testing. In particular, we determine the extent 
to which the service prototype increases autonomy among the said elders. In 
contrast, designers explore a problem by "thinking as making" and "research 
through design" as they interact with users. The final aim of design research 
is not only a usable solution but a desirable one.

 3 Discussion
================================================================================

Our experience assembling an interdisciplinary research team illustrates the 
utility of the TEAMWORK framework. We found several recommendations to be 
particularly useful. (1) Early discussions about authorship conventions and 
team members’ goals set up friendly environment. (2) Frequent communication via 
weekly meetings improved members’ accessibility and motivation. (3) 
Institutional support facilitated the recruitment of team members and provided 
an environment conducive to collaboration.

The five-step “deep dive” guides integration of knowledge from several 
disciplines. We began by conducting secondary research --- a procedure that 
allowed us to identify gaps in knowledge and better understand how elder 
autonomy is conceptualized across disciplines. Secondary research, 
brainstorming, and visualization allowed us to generate a conceptual model that 
guided primary data collection and analysis. In the future, we will apply our 
findings to the development and testing of a service prototype.

 4 Conclusion
================================================================================

In this paper, we described the challenges and benefits of interdisciplinary 
research, and reported on our experience of applying the two frameworks to 
promote it. As a case study, we used the research problem of autonomy among 
elders living with a chronic health condition in the residential care setting. 
We hope our experiences can empower researchers to create more 
interdisciplinary collaborations.
