Evaluating Frameworks for Interdisciplinary Collaboration in Academia

Ellen, Peizun, and Alexi


\section{Introduction}

Interdisciplinary collaboration can be challenging, complicated by
each discipline having its own approach to problem solving, and
potentially differing standards.  Frameworks exist for facilitating
such collaboration, but they have not been well tested in an academic
environment.  In this work, we assemble an interdisciplinary team of
researchers to tackle a problem as one, and report on how useful the
aforementioned frameworks proved to be.


\section{Background and Motivation}

In this work, we test two strategies for interdisciplinary
collaboration: Choi and Pak's TEAMWORK~\cite{CP07} and Witterman and
Stahl's Deep Dive~\cite{WS13,K01}.

TEAMWORK is a framework which describes how to collaborate effectively
across disciplines.  The acronym itself stands for Team, Enthusiasm,
Accessibility, Motivation, Workplace, Objectives, Role, and Kinship,
eight facets of collaboration that the authors deem essential for
success in an interdisciplinary environment.  Each of the facets will
be discussed in more detail in the following section, with examples
drawn from our own experience.

Another strategy for enhancing interdisciplinary collaboration is
Witterman and Stahl's 'Deep Dive'.  This is a 5 step process: When a
team has selected a problem to tackle, they are advised to (1)
identify gaps in current knowledge surrounding the problem, (2)
observe current practices and obtain user perspectives, (3) visualize
potential solutions, (4) develop and test prototypes, and finally (5)
implement the solution.

This work aims to test both strategies in the context of an academic
project addressing the problem of autonomy among elderly people with
chronic illnesses in residential care.  The process of the
interdisciplinary team being assembled and working together is
discussed below, with specific regards to the TEAMWORK and Deep Dive
frameworks presented.


\section{Applying TEAMWORK}

In this section we discuss the details of the TEAMWORK framework, and
how we applied it to this project.

\paragraph{Team} The first step in having a good team is to have a
leader who understands the project and can recognize the variety of
expertise required.  All team members must have good cooperation and
communication skills in order to work together on something out of the
scope of any individual person.  In our project, we drew members from
the fields of human-computer interaction (HCI), design, business, and
nursing.  Leading the group were faculty from each of these areas,
ensuring that our team had competent and knowledgeable leadership with
a wide knowledge base.

\paragraph{Enthusiasm} People are going to be more committed to a
project if it is something they are interested in; as such, this
project was chosen to be something that motivated everyone.  However,
interest in the topic is not the only factor -- personal commitment to
a project is enhanced if the success of the project can assist in
meeting career goals.  In other words, people need to be getting
something out of the work in order to be motivated.  In this project,
there were some barriers to this, as the rules for choosing order of
authorship or in selecting a venue for publication to maximize
reputability are incompatible between some disciplines.  To combat
this, we addressed the problem of authorship early to avoid
awkwardness near paper-submission time.  The topic of autonomy among
elderly people with chronic illnesses in residential care was also
identified as one which interested all members of the research team.

\paragraph{Accessibility} Clearly, communication is a vital part of
any group work.  Ensuring regular meetings and being available (either
in person or via email) to answer questions in a timely manner allows
for the project to progress and to make sure everyone is on the same
page.  We scheduled weekly meetings to keep everyone engaged, and
accounted for varying schedules by inviting members to connect
remotely if they couldn't make it in person.

\paragraph{Motivation} Continued motivation in the project is
essential for continued productivity.  Again, interest in the research
problem itself is not always enough.  In this project, motivating aids
were comprised of money (by way of a grant), and not overwhelming the
team members, designing the work schedule around when they had the
most free time.

\paragraph{Workplace} Working at an institution which fosters
interdisciplinary research is also helpful for successful team work
with a diverse group.  In this project, everyone attended a university
that actually encouraged (and even funded) the collaboration between
different departments.

\paragraph{Objectives} Having a clear goal and some plan for steps
along the way means people know what they should be doing and what is
next in the work.  This is just another basic aspect of communication,
where everyone working together is on the same page in terms of what
the point of the project is.

\paragraph{Role} Everyone knows what they are supposed to be doing on
the project.  Clear roles and division of responsibilities is another
basic aspect of productive group work.

\paragraph{Kinship} Being friendly and having good communications
between team members makes for a more open, welcoming, and thus more
productive work environment.  One concrete way to foster an inviting
environment when working with an interdisciplinary team is to avoid
excessive use of area-specific jargon which might confuse the
collaborators from other fields, which we were very aware of while
working on this project.


\section{Deep Dive}

As described, we adapted the `Deep Dive' technique for our
interdisciplinary project as the following 5 step process: (1)
identify research gaps and understand the scope of the problem; (2)
visualize theory-based conceptual models; (3) conduct user research to
observe current practices and ascertain usersâ€™ perspectives; (4)
prototype, design, develop, and test the proposed services; and (5)
implementation of the newly designed service.  Since the project is
still in progress, we present the first three phases in this section.

\paragraph{Identify Research Problems} To identify valuable research
problems, the first step is to conduct an extensive background study
in your research area and then identify existing research gaps.

\paragraph{Visualize Theory-Based Conceptual Models} To guide the user
research, we need to develop conceptual models in two steps: we first
identify ``themes" from literature independently; then, we visualize
these themes to build conceptual models.

\paragraph{Conduct User Research} Conducting user research is a key
step for the success of a research project. This phase includes
finding eligible participants and collecting extensive qualitative
data.
    
In our deep dive, we started by looking at our chosen problem from all
angles, framing the problem within each member's individual area of
expertise.  This allowed us to formulate a plan of attack (so to
speak), making objectives clear for everyone.  We then brainstormed
together, visualizing each of our models in a lightweight manner and
grouping related concepts from all fields.  This allowed us to
construct a model which was aware of each member's take on the
problem.  We validated our model with user research, drawing from and
consolidated established methods from all fields.  Results will be
made available in a forthcoming paper.


\section{Discussion/Conclusion}

In sum, our experience indicates that both the TEAMWORK framework as
well as the deep dive are effective tools for facilitating
interdisciplinary collaboration.  In particular, with TEAMWORK we
quickly identified and addressed issues such as authorship convention
and personal scheduling, and welcomed the support of our institution
for multi-area research projects.  The first few steps of the ``deep
dive'' helped us quickly integrate our individual, discipline-specific
knowledge and focus on the problem at hand.  We hope that others are
motivated by our success, and feel empowered to engage in their own
cross-cutting research.




\biblio

@article{CP07, author = {C.K. Choi, Bernard and W.P. Pak, Anita}, year
= {2007}, month = {02}, pages = {224-232}, title =
{Multidisciplinarity, interdisciplinarity, and transdisciplinarity in
health research, services, education and policy: 2. Promotors,
barriers, and strategies of enhancement}, volume = {30}, journal =
{Clinical and investigative medicine} }

@article{WS13, author = {Holly O Witteman and James E Stahl}, title =
{Facilitating interdisciplinary collaboration to tackle complex
problems in health care: report from an exploratory workshop}, journal
= {Health Systems}, volume = {2}, number = {3}, pages = {162-170},
year = {2013} }

@article{K01, author = {Kelley, Tom}, year = {2001}, month = {01},
pages = {}, title = {The Art of Innovation: Lessons in Creativity from
IDEO, America's Leading Design Firm}, volume = {10}, journal =
{Broadway Business} }

