q# CS7976 Homework 2

by Julia Belyakova

## Paper 1: A Simple Soundness Proof for Dependent Object
   Types

### Original Paragraph

2016 was an exciting year for those who desire a formalism
to understand and reason about the unique features of
Scalaâ€™s type system. Mechanized soundness results were
published for the Dependent Object Types (DOT) calculus and
other related calculi [Amin et al. 2016; Amin and Rompf
2017; Rompf and Amin 2016]. These proofs were the
culmination of an elusive search that spanned more than ten
years. The chief subtleties and paradoxes inherent in DOT
and the Scala type system, which made the proof so
challenging, were documented along the way [Amin et
al. 2012, 2014].  Since the DOT calculus exhibits such
subtle and counterintuitive behaviour, and since the proofs
are the result of such a long effort, it is to be expected
that the proofs must be complicated.

### Rewritten Paragraph

Scala's type system is known to be complex. To facilitate
understanding and reasoning about the features of the type
system, several formal calculi have been developed,
including the Dependent Object Types (DOT). The earliest
formalism appeared in 2004?, and DOT was presented in 2012?;
however, it was not until 2016 that mechanized soundness
results were published for DOT and related calculi
[Amin et al. 2016; Amin and Rompf 2017; Rompf and Amin
2016]. The reason soundness proofs are so challenging is
that calculi such as DOT inherit subtleties and paradoxes of
the Scala type system; those were documented along the way
[Amin et al. 2012, 2014].

